Must
====

What are the issues?
--------------------

1. What should the semantics of "must" be? In particular, should weakness be built into the semantics of "must"?

2. What (type/strength of) evidence does a speaker need (or do listeners attribute to speakers) for an utterance of "must p" to be licensed? In comparison, what (type/strength of) evidence is required for "p"?

3. What do speakers commit themselves to truth-conditionally in uttering "must p" ("p"? "might p"?)? Relatedly, what are the entailment relations between "must p", and "p"


How have others dealt with the issues?
--------------------

### vFG (2010)

1. Semantics: strong "must". "must p" only defined if the kernel K (of propositions representing all of the speaker's direct information) does not direclty settle p, ie does not either entail or contradict it, but p is in the deductive closure E of K. HOW DO YOU MAKE IT INTO THE KERNEL? -> they say `direct evidence or trustworthy reports' -> there seems to be no clear definition of this beyond appeal to intuition. Matthewson extends this: sensory evidence that p; trustworthy reports that p; world knowledge. She then says that all three of these are determined by TRUSTWORTHINESS. 

2. Evidence: "must p": indirect evidence for p. "p": direct evidence for p. Evidence directness is a presupposition (as opposed to a conventional implicature).

3. Commitment/entailment: "must p" entails p; a speaker who utters "must p" is committed to p; "You can’t have direct information that P unless it is the case that P" (vFG, p. 371). (This is externalist silliness.)

### Matthewson (in press)

Thinks it's wrong to call them "epistemic" modals anyway; treat all the epistemic modals as evidentials.

1. Semantics: AGNOSTIC

2. Evidence: Rather than requiring the absence of a particular type of evidence (say, perceptual evidence), "must" and "might" rule out evidence of a certain level of trustworthiness or reliability (ie cutting across the branches of Willets's taxonomy of evidence types). IS THIS SIMILAR TO WHAT WE'VE BEEN TALKING ABOUT AS EVIDENCE *STRENGTH*? -> She even calls it "strength" at some point (p. 8), citing herself (2011b)

3. Commitment/entailment: AGNOSTIC

### Lassiter (to appear)

1. Semantics: weak "must" (replace vFG's "is entailed by the direct information" with "is the best explanation for the direct information").

2. Evidence: same as vFG? he doesn't really say much about the evidential component except that "must" encodes an indirect evidential meaning.

3. Commitment/entailment: splits up the issue into three components: 1. pragmatic strength (speaker committment, blameworthiness), 2. semantic strength (doxastic status of p), 3. semantic strength (veridicity, "actual" status of p). His position: "must p" does not entail p; ie a speaker who utters "must p" is not committed to p, but just thinks p is the best explanation of the facts. AGNOSTIC on the veridicity issue (reasonably so). 

### Karttunen, 1972; Veltman, 1985; Kratzer, 1991

1. Semantics: Kratzer, 1991: weak "must". Veltman, 1985: strong bare.

2. Evidence:

3. Commitment/entailment: 


What are the empirical predictions of L, M, vFG? What are cases that would help weed out theories?
---------

### Semantics

Whether necessity is built into the semantics of "must" seems to be a big deal, but I don't see that this is an empirical issue. Whether you say "must" is underlyingly strong but we feel that it's weak because of the evidential component it contributes; or whether you say it's weak, empirically I don't see that this will make a difference. vFG mention the Mastermind and the prime example, where it's clear (?) that the speaker has no uncertainty about p in their use of "must p", as evidence that "must" is sometimes not weak. Even if we accept these examples, just because "must" is sometimes strong doesn't mean that the strength needs to be in the semantics; maybe it's pragmatically derived in those cases. But they then claim that "must" is in fact never weak, citing examples like
> \#It must be raining, but perhaps it is not raining

which they claim is weird. Dan found some nice examples (eg example (10), p. 7) that have this same general form but go through just fine.

Again, the semantic strength issue seems to me not to be an empirical issue; what we take speakers to be committing themselves to, on the other hand, is. More below. 

### Speaker commitments / entailments

vFG claim the speaker commits himself to p in uttering "must p", using the "You were wrong! -- \# No I wasn't!" blameworthiness test. Dan lists a counterexample (example (12) on p. 8), and makes the observation that the ease of obtaining definitive evidence to resolve whether or not p plays a role in how felicitous the "No I wasn't" response is. Under his account, the speaker is just committed to p being the best explanation of the facts at the time that "must p" was uttered, without committing to maximal certainty about p. 

This is interesting. Some predictions: under vFG's account, listeners should always ascribe maximal certainty in p to speakers and consider them blameworthy if p turns out to be false. Under Dan's account, listeners should just believe that the speaker had no better explanation than p for the available evidence. That is, if the evidence is set up right, listeners should be able to ascribe to speakers a very weak belief in p after a "must p" utterance. More generally: vFG predict strong speaker belief in p (or listeners' ascription thereof), whereas Dan's account is compatible with a large degree of contextual variation in speaker belief strength in p (or listeners' ascription thereof). 

What is it that should lead to variation under Dan's account? Quality of evidence (and ease of obtaining definitive p-truth resolving evidence, though he doesn't formalize that bit I think). More below.

### Evidence

There are multiple dimensions along which to think about evidential restrictions on the use of "must p". vFG say the only restriction is that the evidence for p be indirect, ie that p not be in the kernel, but in the deductive closure of the kernel, and they seem to be saying that this is the sort of evidence that's in the right-most branch of Willett's taxonomy of evidence (but maybe also reportatives that aren't fully trustworthy?). Dan doesn't really talk much about the evidential component but seems to agree with the general approach of treating it as an indirectness presupposition. Matthewson on the other hand focuses on being clearer about the evidential component while remaining relatively agnostic about the rest of the business (speaker commitments, veradicity). For her, rather than being restricted to coming from the rightmost branch, the evidence needs to be below a certain *trustworthiness* or reliability threshold. That is, the evidence can come from any branch of the evidential tree, so long as it's not entirely trustworthy wrt the truth of p. Types of evidence that send propositions to the kernel:
>i. information obtained by sensory observation in the utterance situation
>ii. trustworthy reports
>iii. general knowledge

The unifying property behind these is trustworthiness, she says. In a different place (p. 8) she explicitly speaks of evidence trustworthiness as evidence *strength*.

#### Predictions I: "must p" is only ok to use if the speaker has 
- vFG: *indirect* evidence (or untrustworthy reports?), but not other types of evidence
- Matthewson: evidence of any type that's below some trustworthiness/strength threshold
- Dan: indirect?

It seems that none of the accounts predict a gradient effect of evidence strength on the naturalness of or expectation for "must p". Even Matthewson seems to predict a step function: "must p" not ok above thrheshold, ok below threshold.

#### Predictions II: What evidence will listeners ascribe to the speaker who utters "must p"?
- vFG: only indirect evidence
- Matthewson: only evidence below a certain trustworthiness threshold
- Dan: indirect? evidence e that makes p the best explanation of e

#### Problems:

- How can we independently establish directness of a piece of evidence e for a proposition p in terms of entailment relations between e and p? Does this even work for the general case?



Which issues do our experiments thus far contribute to?
--------------------

### Evidence

Speakers are more likely to use "must p" (compared to bare prejacent) as the evidence strength for p decreases, and they're more likely to use "must p" with indirect evidence than with direct evidence (barring some possible statistical trustworthiness issues -- ha). So, both vFG and Matthewson are a little right; but both of them are a little wrong, too: neither one makes the probabilistic prediction. Does Dan? That's still unclear to me.

Listeners rate the strength of the evidence available to the speaker as lower when the speaker says "must p" than when he says "p". Again, this is not a step function. Not enough power here to address the evidence *type* issue in addition to evidence *strength*.

### Commitment

Our experiments don't directly address the commitment issue, since we ask participants to rate how likely they think it is that p, not how likely they think it is that the speaker believes p. They did believe that p was less likely after observing "must p" than after observing the bare form, but that of course leaves it open how strongly they believe that *the speaker* believes that p. 


What are the modeling approaches we've been pursuing?
--------------------
- possible worlds semantics with [[must p]] = "necessarily in all worlds p" and "p"


How do the modeling approaches we've been pursuing contribute to the issues?
--------------------


Relation to attitude verbs
--------------------------

How does the view of epistemic "must" as an evidential marker relate to the rich literature on factivity/veridicality in attitude verbs and whether the content of the mental state or the state of the reported conversation gets foregrounded/backgrounded?


What should we do next?
--------------------

### Experiments

- experiment that directly tests listeners' expectations about *speaker commitment* rather than their beliefs about the world after observing "must p"/"p"
- tease apart issue of evidence *type* and *strength* on 
	1. production (choice between "p" and "must p")
	2. comprehension (listeners' ascription of evidence to speakers) -- independent effects? does one subsume the other?

### Models


Quotes and other useful bits
------

Matthewson (in press, p. 1) on the issue of all epistemic modals being evidentials:
> all epistemic modals encode evidential information, as a matter of definition, since an ‘epistemic modal’ is a modal whose modal base relies on evidence (not on knowledge)

Westmoreland (1995, p. 699) as cited in vFG (2010) on the indirectness contribution of "must":
> epistemic must ‘‘contributes the information that the propositional content of the sentence is inferred rather than known’’

vFG (2010), making a strong (ie stupid) ontological commitment: 
> you can’t have direct information that P unless it is the case that P. So for a modal uttered at w, with respect to a kernel K, we know that w ∈ ∩K.

Matthewson (in press, p. 9) on the distinction between evidence trustworthiness/strength and speaker certainty:
> It is important that the trustworthiness distinction is still an evidential notion, and does not reduce to speaker certainty about the prejacent proposition.

Willett (1988, p. 57)'s taxonomy of evidence types:
>	- direct 
>		1. attested -- visual / auditory / other sensory
>	- indirect
>		1. reported -- second-hand / third-hand / folklore
>		2. inferring -- results / reasoning